v8.0.0-alpha.3 (#15750)
mui/mui-x: CHANGELOG.md

@arminmeh, @cherniavskii, @flaviendelangle, @JCQuintas, @MBilalShafi, @noraleonte.

<!--/ HIGHLIGHT_ABOVE_SEPARATOR /-->

### Data Grid

### Breaking changes

- The "Select all" checkbox is now checked when all the selectable rows are selected, ignoring rows that are not selectable because of the `isRowSelectable` prop.
- The `rowPositionsDebounceMs` prop was removed.
- The `gridRowsDataRowIdToIdLookupSelector` selector was removed. Use the `gridRowsLookupSelector` selector in combination with the `getRowId()` API method instead.
  ```diff
  -const idToIdLookup = gridRowsDataRowIdToIdLookupSelector(apiRef);
  -const rowId = idToIdLookup[id]
  +const rowsLookup = gridRowsLookupSelector(apiRef);
  +const rowId = apiRef.current.getRowId(rowsLookup[id])
  ```
- The Grid is now more aligned with the WAI-ARIA authoring practices and sets the `role` attribute to `treegrid` if the Data Grid is used with row grouping feature.

#### `@mui/x-data-grid@8.0.0-alpha.3`

- [DataGrid] Fix deselection not working with `isRowSelectable` (#15692) @MBilalShafi
- [DataGrid] Make column autosizing work with flex columns (#15465) @cherniavskii

> - [DataGrid] Remove `dataRowIdToIdLookup` selector (#15698) @arminmeh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Remove `gridRowsDataRowIdToIdLookupSelector` selector (#15698) @arminmeh
```

#### `@mui/x-data-grid@8.0.0-alpha.3`

- [DataGrid] Fix deselection not working with `isRowSelectable` (#15692) @MBilalShafi
- [DataGrid] Make column autosizing work with flex columns (#15465) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Remove `gridRowsDataRowIdToIdLookupSelector` selector (#15698) @arminmeh
- [DataGrid] Remove `rowPositionsDebounceMs` prop (#15482) @k-rajat19
- [l10n] Improve Hebrew (he-IL) locale (#15699) @perezShaked
- [l10n] Improve Turkish (tr-TR) locale (#15734) @ihsanberkozcan

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@8.0.0-alpha.3` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid@8.0.0-alpha.3`, plus:

- [DataGridPro] Cleanup pinned rows on removal (#15697) @cherniavskii
- [DataGridPro] Server-side lazy loading (#13878) @arminmeh

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-premium@8.0.0-alpha.3` [![premium](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg-link 'Premium plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@8.0.0-alpha.3`, plus:

- [DataGridPremium] Remove the `ariaV8` experimental flag (#15694) @arminmeh

### Date and Time Pickers

### Breaking changes

> - The `onOpen` and `onClose` methods of the `usePickerContext()` hook have been replaced with a single `setOpen` method — [Learn more](https://next.mui.com/x/migration/migration-pickers-v7/#usepickercontext).

Reviewer 2: Nitpick

```suggestion
- The `onOpen()` and `onClose()` methods of the `usePickerContext()` hook have been replaced with a single `setOpen` method — [Learn more](https://next.mui.com/x/migration/migration-pickers-v7/#usepickercontext).
```

  +const rowsLookup = gridRowsLookupSelector(apiRef);
  +const rowId = apiRef.current.getRowId(rowsLookup[id])
  ```
- The Grid is now more aligned with the WAI-ARIA authoring practices and sets the `role` attribute to `treegrid` if the Data Grid is used with row grouping feature.
- 💫 Support [Server-side lazy loading](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/lazy-loading/) on the Data Grid. Use [data source](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/#data-source) to fetch a range of rows on demand and update the rows in the same way as described in [Infinite loading](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/row-updates/#infinite-loading) and [Lazy loading](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/row-updates/#lazy-loading) without the need to use any additional event listeners and callbacks.
- 🎯 Improved [data caching](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/#data-caching). Check out our [recommendations](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/#improving-the-cache-hit-rate) for improving the cache hit rate.

#### `@mui/x-data-grid@8.0.0-alpha.3`

- [DataGrid] Fix deselection not working with `isRowSelectable` (#15692) @MBilalShafi

> - [DataGrid] Improve SEO titles (#15679) @MBilalShafi

Reviewer: again docs

- [DataGrid] Make column autosizing work with flex columns (#15465) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Remove `dataRowIdToIdLookup` selector (#15698) @arminmeh
- [DataGrid] Remove `rowPositionsDebounceMs` prop (#15482) @k-rajat19
- [l10n] Improve Hebrew (he-IL) locale (#15699) @perezShaked
- [l10n] Improve Turkish (tr-TR) locale (#15734) @ihsanberkozcan

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@8.0.0-alpha.3` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid@8.0.0-alpha.3`, plus:

- [DataGridPro] Cleanup pinned rows on removal (#15697) @cherniavskii

> - [DataGridPro] Server side data source lazy loading (#13878) @arminmeh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [DataGridPro] Server-side lazy loading (#13878) @arminmeh
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 8.0.0-alpha.3
_Dec 5, 2024_

We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 9 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

TODO INSERT HIGHLIGHTS

Special thanks go out to the community contributors who have helped make this release possible:
@ihsanberkozcan, @k-rajat19, @perezShaked.
Following are all team members who have contributed to this release:
@arminmeh, @cherniavskii, @flaviendelangle, @JCQuintas, @MBilalShafi, @noraleonte.

<!--/ HIGHLIGHT_ABOVE_SEPARATOR /-->

### Data Grid

### Breaking changes

> - The "Select all" checkbox would now be checked when all the selectable rows are selected, ignoring rows that are not selectable because of the `isRowSelectable` prop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The "Select all" checkbox is now checked when all the selectable rows are selected, ignoring rows that are not selectable because of the `isRowSelectable` prop.
```

- The `rowPositionsDebounceMs` prop was removed.

>   From https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/15698

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> - `gridRowsDataRowIdToIdLookupSelector` was removed. Use `gridRowsLookupSelector` in combination with `getRowId()` API method instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `gridRowsDataRowIdToIdLookupSelector` selector was removed. Use the `gridRowsLookupSelector selector` in combination with the `getRowId()` API method instead.
```

It's subjective but I'm not a huge fan of skipping words like that to save space :angel:

  ```diff
  -const idToIdLookup = gridRowsDataRowIdToIdLookupSelector(apiRef);
  -const rowId = idToIdLookup[id]
  +const rowsLookup = gridRowsLookupSelector(apiRef);
  +const rowId = apiRef.current.getRowId(rowsLookup[id])
  ```

> - The Grid is more aligned with the WAI-ARIA authoring practices and sets the `role` attribute to `treegrid` if the Data Grid is used with row grouping feature.

Reviewer 2: Unsure

```suggestion
- The Grid is now more aligned with the WAI-ARIA authoring practices and sets the `role` attribute to `treegrid` if the Data Grid is used with row grouping feature.
```

> - 💫 Support [Server-side lazy loading](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/lazy-loading/) on the Data Grid. Use [data source](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/#data-source) to fetch a range of rows on demand and update the rows in the same way as described in [Infinite loading](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/row-updates/#infinite-loading) and [Lazy loading](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/row-updates/#lazy-loading) without the need to use any additional event listeners and callbacks.

Reviewer 2: This one and the one after are highlights not breaking changes no?

Author: mmh, seems like it ... wa added into the same category by the script ... will move them! 🙇🏼

#### `@mui/x-data-grid@8.0.0-alpha.3`

- [DataGrid] Fix deselection not working with `isRowSelectable` (#15692) @MBilalShafi
- [DataGrid] Improve SEO titles (#15679) @MBilalShafi
- [DataGrid] Make column autosizing work with flex columns (#15465) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Remove `dataRowIdToIdLookup` selector (#15698) @arminmeh
- [DataGrid] Remove `rowPositionsDebounceMs` prop (#15482) @k-rajat19
- [l10n] Improve Hebrew (he-IL) locale (#15699) @perezShaked
- [l10n] Improve Turkish (tr-TR) locale (#15734) @ihsanberkozcan

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@8.0.0-alpha.3` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid@8.0.0-alpha.3`, plus:

- [DataGridPro] Cleanup pinned rows on removal (#15697) @cherniavskii
- [DataGridPro] Server side data source lazy loading (#13878) @arminmeh

#### `@mui/x-data-grid-premium@8.0.0-alpha.3` [![premium](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-premium-svg-link 'Premium plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@8.0.0-alpha.3`, plus:

> - [DataGridPremium] Remove the ariaV8 experimental flag (#15694) @arminmeh

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DataGridPremium] Remove the `ariaV8` experimental flag (#15694) @arminmeh
```

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers@8.0.0-alpha.3`

- [pickers] Replace the `onOpen()` and `onClose()` methods of `usePickerContext()` with a single `setOpen()` method. (#15701) @flaviendelangle

#### `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro@8.0.0-alpha.3` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-date-pickers@8.0.0-alpha.3`.

### Charts

#### `@mui/x-charts@8.0.0-alpha.3`

- [charts] Improve SVG `pattern` and `gradient` support (#15720) @JCQuintas

#### `@mui/x-charts-pro@8.0.0-alpha.3` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-charts@8.0.0-alpha.3`.

### Tree View

#### `@mui/x-tree-view@8.0.0-alpha.3`

No changes since `@mui/x-tree-view-pro@v8.0.0-alpha.2`.

#### `@mui/x-tree-view-pro@8.0.0-alpha.3` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-tree-view@8.0.0-alpha.3`.

### `@mui/x-codemod@8.0.0-alpha.3`

- [codemod] Add missing `preset-safe` for the Data Grid (#15709) @arminmeh

### Docs

> - [docs] Customization demo for the Date and Time Pickers overview page (#15118) @noraleonte

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [docs] Add a customization demo for the Date and Time Pickers overview page (#15118) @noraleonte
```

- [docs] Fix typo in charts axis documentation (#15743) @JCQuintas

### Core

- [core] Add `@mui/x-tree-view-pro` to `releaseChangelog` (#15316) @flaviendelangle

> - [code-infra] Lock file maintenance (#11894)

Reviewer 2: :thinking: No author here?

Author: no, since this is a bot PR and both @LukasTy and @JCQuintas worked on that
i can add both if thats ok
